

: Before dealing with synchronous and asynchronous programming, we shall know bout these important Terminology.

---
## **Important Terminology**
1.  [[01. Call Stack]]
2.  [[02. Callback Queue]]
3.   [[03. Event loop]]

---

## **Synchronous Programming**

- The programming we have been doing till now.
- All lines of codes are executed instantaneously at once
- This cannot be used in programming related to API calls and Database management as the responses from DB<mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;"> and API are not received instantaneously
</mark>
## **Asynchronous programming**

- The exact opposite of Synchronous programming
- Since the codes aren't executed instantaneously, the asynchronous functions can account for the delayed responses from the DB and API calls
- Thus this style of programming is used when dealing with API, Servers, DB etc.

---

## ***Closures***

```javascript
function outerFunction() {
  let counter = 0;

  function innerFunction() {
    counter++;
    console.log(counter);
  }

  return innerFunction;
}

const closure = outerFunction();
closure(); // outputs 1
closure(); // outputs 2
closure(); // outputs 3
```

### **Closure Function Points**

1. **Definition**: A closure is a function that has access to its outer function's scope.
2. **Variable Access**: It can use and manipulate the variables of the outer function.
3. **Creation**: A closure is created when a function is defined inside another function.
4. **Scope Persistence**: The inner function has access to the variables of the outer function even after the outer function has returned.
5. **Private Variables and Functions**: Closures are often used to create private variables and functions.
6. **Higher-Order Functions**: They are also used to create higher-order functions, which are functions that take other functions as arguments or return functions as output.
7. **Module Pattern**: Closures can be used to implement the module pattern, which is a design pattern used to create private variables and functions.
8. **Singleton Pattern**: They can also be used to implement the singleton pattern, which is a design pattern used to create a single instance of a class.

```javascript
const counterClosure = () => {
  let count = 0;
  return {
    increment: () => {
      return count++;
    },
    decrement: () => {
      return count--;
    },
    getCount: () => {
      return count;
    },
  };
};

const counter = counterClosure();
console.log(counter.getCount()); // outputs 0
counter.increment();
console.log(counter.getCount()); // outputs 1
counter.decrement();
console.log(counter.getCount());
counter.increment();
counter.increment();
counter.increment();
console.log(counter.getCount());
```

---

### **Callback Functions**

- We can pass a function itself as an argument to a function and call the parameter-function from the main function .
- eg-1:

```javascript
const sum = (x, y, callbackfunction) => {
  let temp = x + y;
  callbackfunction(temp);
};
let sum1 = sum(2, 3, (e) => {
  console.log("The sum of the number is" + e);
});

```

- eg-2:

```js
  const fetchdata=(callback)=>{
	  let data = "Data from the server";
	  if(data)
	  {callback(null,data)}
	  else
	  {callback("No data found",null)}

	  }

  
  
         fetchdata((error,result)=>{if(error){console.log("Error":error)} else{console.log("Result":result)}})
```

`note: the syntax for callback fucntion is like this: callback(error,data)`

---
## **Promises**
-  Promises are a fundamental concept in asynchronous programming because they provide a structured and efficient way to manage operations that will complete in the future, such as network requests, file reading, or timers.
- Find the  meaning and application of promises Here: [[04. Promises]]

## **Built-in Modules for Async Programming**
- [[05. Built-in Modules of Nodejs]]
- 